We can’t measure the things that matter most
Metrics are typically just a proxy for what we really care about. The paper Does Machine Learning Automate Moral Hazard and Error? covers an interesting example: the researchers investigate which factors in someone’s electronic medical record are most predictive of a future stroke. However, the researchers found that several of the most predictive factors (such as accidental injury, a benign breast lump, or colonoscopy) don’t make sense as risk factors for stroke. So, just what is going on? It turned out that the model was just identifying people who utilize health care a lot. They didn’t actually have data of who had a stroke (a physiological event in which regions of the brain are denied new oxygen); they had data about who had access to medical care, chose to go to a doctor, were given the needed tests, and had this billing code added to their chart. But a number of factors influence this process: who has health insurance or can afford their co-pay, who can take time off of work or find childcare, gender and racial biases that impact who gets accurate diagnoses, cultural factors, and more. As a result, the model was largely picking out people who utilized healthcare versus who did not.

This an example of the common phenomenon of having to use proxies: You want to know what content users like, so you measure what they click on. You want to know which teachers are most effective, so you measure their students test scores. You want to know about crime, so you measure arrests. These things are not the same. Many things we do care about can not be measured. Metrics can be helpful, but we can’t forget that they are just proxies.

As another example, Google used hours spent watching YouTube as a proxy for how happy users were with the content, writing on the Google blog that “If viewers are watching more YouTube, it signals to us that they’re happier with the content they’ve found.” Guillaume Chaslot, an AI engineer who formerly worked at Google/YouTube, shares how this had the side effect of incentivizing conspiracy theories, since convincing users that the rest of the media is lying kept them watching more YouTube.

Metrics can, and will, be gamed
It is almost inevitable that metrics will be gamed, particularly when they are given too much power. One week this spring, Chaslot collected 84,695 videos from YouTube and analyzed the number of views and the number of channels from which they were recommended. This is what he found (also covered in the Washington Post):